"A native of Norway, born in 1848, he is well-known as a 
college professor, first at Cornell University and now at Columbia College, as 
well as a lecturer and writer on literary and social subjects.  He is 
especially well-schooled in German and Scandinavian literature.  Poems, 
Idylls of Norway.  (Charles Scribner's Sons.)"  (Crandall            
            
             
        
     )

If the Rose Could Speak
Thy Wondrous Name
Evolution
The Lily
Prescience of 
  Death 










If the Rose Could Speak

Within the rose I found a trembling tear,
Close curtained in a gloom of crimson night
By tender petals from the outer light,
I plucked the flower and held it to my ear,
And thought within its fervid breast to hear
A smothered heart-beat throbbing soft and low.
I heard its busy life-blood gently flow,
Now far away and now so strangely near.
Ah, thought I, if these silent lips of flame
Could be unsealed and fling into the air
Their woe, their passion, and in speech proclaim
Their warm intoxication of despair;--
Then would I give the rose into thy hand;
Thou couldst its voice, beloved, not withstand.

Thy Wondrous Name

How can I lightly speak thy wondrous name,
Which breathes the airy fragrance of thyself,
As might, far straying from his flower, the elf
Hold yet a breath within his fragile frame
Of the flower's soul, betraying whence he came?
I too, beloved, though we stray apart,
Since in the vestal temple of thy heart
I dwell secure, glow with a sacred flame.
A breath of thy sweet self unto me clings--
A wondrous voice, as of large unborn deeds,
With deep resoundings, through my being rings,
And unto wider realms of vision leads.
And dead to me are sorrow, doubt, and pain;
The slumbering god within me wakes again.
(Above 
texts from  American Sonnets)


Evolution
      
I am the child of earth and air and sea,        
      
My lullaby by hoarse Silurian storms        
      
Was chanted; and through endless changing forms        
      
Of plant and bird and beast unceasingly        
      
The toiling ages wrought to fashion me.        
      
Lo, these large ancestors have left a breath        
      
Of their strong souls in mine, defying death        
      
And      
doom.  I grow and blossom as the tree,        

      
And ever feel deep-delving, earthy roots        
      
Binding me daily to the common clay;        
      
But with its airy impulse upward shoots        
      
My life into the realms of light and day.        
      
And though, O Sea, stern mother of my soul,        
      
Thy tempests sing in me, thy billows roll!        

The Lily
      
I saw the lily pale and perfect grow        
      
Amid  its silent sisters in the mead.        
      
Methought within its chilly depth to read        
      
A maidenly severity, as though        
      
A cool young life lay slumbering in the snow        
      
Of its frail substance.  In that chalice white,        
      
Whose fairy texture shone against the light,        
      
An unwakened pulse beat faint and slow.        

      
And I remembered, love, thy coy disdain,        
      
When thou my love for thee hadst first divined;        
      
  Thy proud, shy tenderness,—too proud to feign        
      
 That willful blindness which is yet not blind.        
      
 Then toward the sun thy lily-life I turned,—        
      
  With sudden splendor flushed its chalice burned.        

Prescience of Death
      
 I wonder oft why God, who is so good,        
      
Has      
barred so close, so close the gates of death.        
      
  I stand and listen with suspended breath        
      
 While night and silence round about me brood,        
      
   If then, perchance, some spirit-whisper would        
      
  Grow audible and pierce my torpid sense.        
      
 And oft I feel a presence, veiled intense,        
      
   That pulses softly through the solitude;        

      
But as my soul leaps quivering to my ear        
      
 To grasp the potent message, all takes flight,        
      
And from the fields and woods I only hear        
      
  The murmurous chorus of the summer night.        
      
I am as on that's dead,—yet in his gloom        
      
 Feels faintly song of birds above his tomb.        
      
                 

      
   (Above three texts from Representative Sonnets by 
American      
   Poets)
