





Tragic Night

Rain, and a glare of lamps set in the rain,
Where seekers for numb brains and deadened wills
Stagger like helpless idiots through the pain
Of vain remembrance of increasing ills.
The dazzle of light in the darkness thickly fills
The breadth of street with long and snake-like stain
Of false gold, which the weak sight blinds and kills,
While through it all come slipping by amain,
Like vast black birds of prey with eyes aglow,
The automobiles, mid shrieks and howls of lust;
No deeper tragedy the earth can know
Than this, its night of pain and rain and rust,
Where death is only death and nothingness.

Triumphant Night

As once I wandered lonely in the night,
Upon some grey and grimy street belated,
I saw a sad man and a woman white,
Clasped in a doorway low, unconsecrated.
And they were parting, for their sobs came thick
Across the street to where I wandered, deeming
That all the world with ugliness was sick,
And that life held no moments worth esteeming.
Vision of the night, you mocked me then
With sudden floods of beauty, power and glory!
I saw the paltry, weak desires of men
Rise from our hearts, and conquer song and story,
And flout the idle Gods who do not love us,
And sweep away the swarm of stars above us.

The Hour of Peace

It is the hour when all is dark and still;
When long despair, brief hope, alike resign
Their ancient dominance of human will;
When life no longer to the far sea-line
Bends its gray sails, worn with the winds of ill,
Seeking those unseen lands beyond the brine
Which never, through the bitter foam and chill,
A man shall mark, and marvel as they shine;
It is the hour of silence. No one cares
To think of toil now, asking, "What is done
By all our effort endlessly onstreaming?"
For we are sick of mocking, sly despairs,
And we would rest as if all time were gone,
Filling the hour of peace with foolish dreaming.

From the Night to the Dawn

In every night some haggard hours there are
Whose passing is unnoted, save by those
Unconquered by dim slumber and her shows;
The wretched and the houseless near and far,
And those for whom the night cannot unbar
The common gate to her divine repose,
Whose nerves are torn by living and its woes,
Until they sink in some melee of war.
These know and these alone the secret things:
The mysteries which those who see must die:
The silent spaces of which no one sings:
The grey death-minutes fading, till on high
Aloft there flash the sudden glorious wings
Of dawn and fill with light the hollow sky.

Back Streets

You that have gazed long on the city s splendour,
Behold its life, how thick and red it runs!
From dawn to dusk and on through countless suns,
Self-spending, self-creating, fixed, untender,
Coarse, deathless, changeless! Do you homage render
To that which with its power the spirit stuns:
And will, until all things are as they once
Were, in the grip of Death, the sole amender.
Thousands of years ago thus in the grime
Life struggled, as it struggles on to-day,
As it must struggle till its latest scene:
No change shall ever be except in time,
Until all things as dreams are swept away,
And the earth is as if it ne'er had been.

The Banners

Like ruddy or tawny masses of torn flame,
Over the whirlpool seething in agony
Defiantly they flap and shake on high
The electricity of life, that, ever the same,
Fulminates in the city's pain and shame,
And streams in smoke-clouds towards the ashen sky;
A roaring chaos of wrath and mystery
Fashioned to pleasure That-Which-Has-No Name:
Banners on banners heavily everywhere,
Soul-oriflammes of blood and hate and lust,
Burst flickering through the abysms of the air.
Leap, condors chained; it is our will; you must.
And scream our tragedy even to those dim
Veils of the dawn, where red stars flicker grim!
