"A Canadian poet who has written a good deal for the American magazines. He has recently published Among the Millet, a volume full of delicate feeling for nature." (Sharp)




The Railway Station
A Night of Storm
Outlook
Evening (Univ. of Toronto)
The Frogs (5 sonnets) (Univ. of Toronto)
The Growth of Love: XI (Univ. of Toronto)
In Beechwood Cemetery (Univ. of Toronto)
In November (1) (Univ. of Toronto)
A January Morning (Univ. of Toronto)
A Niagra Landscape (Univ. of Toronto)
On Lake Témiscamingue (Univ. of Toronto)
On the Companionship with Nature (Univ. of Toronto)
Reality (Univ. of Toronto)
Storm (Univ. of Toronto)
A Sunset at Les Eboulements (Univ. of Toronto)
A Thunderstorm (Univ. of Toronto)
Temagami (Univ. of Toronto)
To a Millionaire (Univ. of Toronto)
To the Ottawa (Univ. of Toronto)
Voices of Earth (Univ. of Toronto)
Winter Evening (Univ. of Toronto)
Winter Uplands (Univ. of Toronto)










The Railway Station

The darkness brings no quiet here, the light
No waking: ever on my blinded brain
The flare of lights, the rush, and cry, and strain,
The engine's scream, the hiss and thunder smite:
I see the hurrying crowds, the clasp, the flight,
Faces that touch, eyes that are dim with pain:
I see the hoarse wheels turn, and the great train
Move labouring out into the boundless night.

So many souls within its dim recesses,
So many bright, so many mournful eyes:
Mine eyes that watch grow fixed with dreams and guesses;
What threads of life, what hidden histories,
What sweet or passionate dreams and dark distresses,
What unknown thoughts, what various agonies!

A Night of Storm

Oh city, whom gray stormy hands have sown
With restless drift, scarce broken now of any,
Out of the dark thy windows dim and many
Gleam red across the storm. Sound is there none,
Save evermore the fierce wind's sweep and moan,
From whose gray hands the keen white snow is shaken
In desperate gusts, that fitfully lull and waken,
Dense as night's darkness round thy towers of stone.

Darkling and strange art thou thus vexed and chidden;
More dark and strange thy veilèd agony,
City of storm, in whose gray heart are hidden
What stormier woes, what lives that groan and beat,
Stern and thin-cheeked, against time's heavier sleet,
Rude fates, hard hearts, and prisoning poverty.

Outlook

Not to be conquered by these headlong days,
But to stand free: to keep the mind at brood
On life's deep meaning, nature's altitude
Of loveliness, and time's mysterious ways;
At every thought and deed to clear the haze
Out of our eyes, considering only this,
What man, what life, what love, what beauty is,
This is to live, and win the final praise.

Though strifes, ill fortune, and harsh human need
Beat down the soul, at moments blind and dumb
With agony; yet, patience--there shall come
Many great voices from life's outer sea,
Hours of strange triumph, and, when few men heed,
Murmurs and glimpses of eternity.

(Three sonnets above; text from American Sonnets)
