
The Cross, the Cross is tainted! O most Just,
Be merciful, and save me from this snare.
The Tempter lures me as I bend in prayer
Before the sacred symbol of our Trust.
Yea, the most Holy of Holies feeds my lust,
The body of thy Christ; for, unaware,
Even as I kneel and pray, lo, She is there,
The Temptress, she the wanton; and she hath thrust
The Christ's bruised body off, and all her own,
Shameless, she stretches on the cross, arms wide,
Limbs pendent, in libidinous mockery.
She draws mine eyes to hers—ah, sin unknown!
She smiles, she triumphs; but the Crucified
Falls off into the darkness with a cry.

The Prodigal Son

I will arise, and leave these haggard realms,
The nether fire's breath spots the rusty grass,
The insatiate hunger of the blight o'erwhelms
The lean year's barren promise. Let me pass,
O woman, from the hold of hell and thee!
What have I done that thou should'st hold me so?
In Love's name, loosen me and set me free;
If not for love, in pity let me go.
Why should I linger? for the land is bare,
And wings of famine labour up the wind.
Already I have wasted all my share
Of living bread: the husks remain behind,
Husks that the swine do eat. And must I wait,
Weary and famished, fallen and desolate?

The Nun

She lies upon the cold stone of her cell,
And the night deepens; and the night is chill,
Fasting and faint, she nerves her flagging will,
Remembering the inevitable hell,
Yet still her lover's voice she hears too well,
And "Love, Love, Love," she hears and answers still.
The Christ looms high against an angry hill,
Her heart and Love would roam a lowly dell.

Fasting and faint she lies. The shepherd Night
Leads the calm stars across his plains like sheep.
Earth slumbers. When shall slumber seal her eyes,
Who, crying with lamentations infinite,
"Heaven, heaven!" yet, ineradicably deep,
Hides in her heart an alien Paradise?

The Absinthe-Drinker

Gently I wave the visible world away.
Far off, I hear a roar, afar yet near,
Far off and strange, a voice is in my ear,
And is the voice my own? the words I say
Fall strangely, like a dream, across the day;
And the dim sunshine is a dream. How clear,
New as the world to lovers' eyes, appear
The men and women passing on their way!

The world is very fair. The hours are all
Linked in a dance of mere forgetfulness.
I am at peace with God and man. O glide,
Sands of the hour-glass that I count not, fall
Serenely: scarce I feel your soft caress.
Rocked on this dreamy and indifferent tide.

Nerves

The modern malady of love is nerves.
Love, once a simple madness, now observes
The stages of his passionate disease,
And is twice sorrowful because he sees,
Inch by inch entering, the fatal knife.
O health of simple minds, give me your life,
And let me, for one midnight, cease to hear
The clock for ever ticking in my ear,
The clock that tells the minutes in my brain.
It is not love, nor love's despair, this pain
That shoots a witless, keener pang across
The simple agony of love and loss.
Nerves, nerves! O folly of a child who dreams
Of heaven, and, waking in the darkness, screams.

The Caged Bird

A year ago I asked you for your soul;
I took it in my hands, it weighed as light
As any bird's wing, it was poised for flight,
It was a wandering thing without a goal.
I caged it, and I tended it; it throve;
Wise ways I taught it; it forgot to fly;
It learnt to know its cage, its keeper; I,
Its keeper, taught it that the cage was love.
And now I take my bird out of the cage,
It flutters not a feather, looks at me
Sadly, without desire, without surprise;
See, I have tamed it, it is still and sage,
It has not strength enough for liberty,
It does not even hate me with its eyes.
