
Four Months

I’m at homecoming, Dad!
I know you didn’t get to see what I was wearing,
but, I will tell you all about it when I come home, Dad.

I’m coming home now, Dad.
Of course we get Wendy’s on the way.
I’ll be home in a couple minutes, Dad.

I’m on our road, Dad.
There’s several cars parked in our driveway.
My stomach drops, 
Are you okay, Dad?

I go inside preparing for the worst, Dad.
I still have an inch of hope. 
Mom tells me the news, I can’t believe her, Dad.

I know you weren’t going to make it much longer, Dad
but I didn’t expect it to be this soon.
I rush to my room,
I can’t be downstairs as all these people see my cry, Dad.

It’s been an hour, Dad.
There’s so many people at our house. 
I can’t bare to go downstairs and see you lying there.
I’m sorry I never got to say goodbye, Dad. 

It’s been five hours, Dad.
Mom keeps sending people to my room to see if I’m okay.
I can’t even talk, I feel like my heart has been ripped out of my chest, Dad.

It’s been a couple of days, Dad 
and it’s been really hard to get out of bed in the morning.
I find Mom crying a lot, and I try to stay strong for her, Dad.

It’s been a week, Dad
and your funeral was today.  
It was the hardest thing I’ve ever gone through.
I tried not to cry, but it was too much to handle. 
I’m sorry, Dad.

It’s been a month, Dad
and school’s just been too stressful.
I find myself thinking about you a lot.
I really miss you, Dad.

It’s been two months, Dad
and I find myself dreaming you’re still here.
I wake up sobbing when I realize you are not here, Dad.

It’s been three months, Dad
and I can’t find a purpose to get up in the morning anymore.
It hurts so bad that you’re gone,
I feel like my world has fallen apart, Dad.

It’s been three and a half months, Dad
and Mom gets angry at me because I’ve given up on everything.
She took me to the doctors today, Dad
and she’s really worried about me.
My friend’s have given up hope on me too.
I feel so alone and I don’t know what to do, Dad.

It’s been four months now, Dad
and it’s still hard getting up in the morning,
I’ve been working on getting better, Dad
but sometimes it’s still a struggle to get up every morning.

I’m trying my best, Dad
But today I just couldn’t get myself up.
I couldn’t get out of bed today, I feel like I’m losing all hope.
I’m sorry, Dad.


