
Childhood

Thinking of the old days, the people and places. There are so many memories, there are so many faces. There were hard times a plenty and it's harder to believe, that a childhood can weigh so heavy when there's no one to relieve the hurt, pain and disgust. That you carry for the ones you're supposed to trust. But how can you trust the ones who are never there? You wait by the door but it doesn't seem fair, that all your friends have parents, who live at home. So you start to blame yourself for why you feel so alone. You start to ask why, you say what did I do? But then your tears run dry and you realize that it's not you. You're not to blame, the faults not yours. But you still carry that pain and you still feel that remorse. And for us that's how it went. We were all but alone. But thank God that for us, we had grandma at home. She carried that burden that Mona's couldn't hold. So thank God for that woman, she's more precious than gold. She was strong enough to keep us both together, she was strong enough to keep us both under pressure. The pressure she felt must've been so strong. But she never let go and she always held on. So it's my firm belief that she molded us both. She didn't plant the seed but she watered the growth. She watched us thrive and for that we both owe, our childhood to that woman who never said no. She never said go, Leave me alone. She just opened her door and gave us a home. Plus for me, there was you. Someone unlike any other. Not than just my cousin, you were more like my brother. You were my best friend and we were partners in crime. And we had each other's back, at the drop of a dime. So we grow up slowly, and time passes by. But nobody ever told me, how fast time flies. Everything happens too quick to see. So open your eyes and try not to blink. Because if you blink you might miss it and then it's gone. So do what she did and just hold on to what you've got, and don't let go. Plant your own seeds and watch them grow. Cherish the memories that are made every day, and don't forget how you got to where you are today. You see for me it's to easy and plain to see. So I'm thankful that my childhood consisted of grandma, you and me.