
Time Flies



At first, there I was in the mind of God as He made preparations for me
As I would learn later, time was sailing, but I was not yet placed in its sphere.
Then the time for my formation arrived, and I stepped into that entity called time.  I tell you, it was exciting! And as I felt the smooth  watery vibrations, I came alive!

I was conceived and began to grow as time moved forward moment by moment.  The moments turned into days and months; and by the 9th month, I was ready to exit.  My mother nourished me from within her being  until the time came for my birth.  The time zone inside my mom was the same time that welcomed me on the outside.

In different segments or periods, time continued to fly from that point, waiting on no one.  I was held and cared for so gently the first several periods of time until I began to crawl.  I stumbled and fell many times and got up, but I could never catch up with the flight of time.  Time was a real though invisible entity, never changing , and my little body was never constant.

As I grew from a little boy to a teenager, it seemed at times that time stood still.
The years seemed to crawl at the pace of snails, and I couldn’t wait to be 18.
Well, 18 finally came, and then the pain, and I wondered when things would change.
Well, romance came and then marriage; and kids followed soon after the wedding bells.
The career and the money came along with bills and never enough time for the thrills.

The kids turned from boys and girls into men and women, and we became empty nesters.  It seems that’s when time began to take on supersonic wings and flew with the winds.  At times I wanted to turn back the hands of time, but it was simply an impossibility.  The next thing I knew, I was growing old and found myself signing up for social security.

O I know that the speed of time has remained the same since I hitched  a ride 67 years ago.  Nevertheless, sometimes I wish it would slow down and not come with the aches and pains.  But still, I understand that God’s in charge, and though many things change, he’s always the same.  So let time fly; and I’ll not be left behind, because I’m hitched to the wings God assigned for me.
10042016 cj PS