
Behind Ghost And Its Story

In the evening, the passerby while lonely passing
Heard some noises of an unseen cart on other way
Which he mistook bone breaking, tearing, chopping,
Murmuring, rumbling, trembling sounds all around,
He was confused, fixed, feared and crying uttering
“Is there a ghost? Oh, ghost! Ghost!! A ghost!!!”
“Where?” Some curious people were rushing to
“Oh! Here is, trying to kill me, can’t you see, men?”
“Oh! Where, how looking?” They were roaming about
“Skeleton like, just skeleton like, oh! Horror!! Horror!!”
 “And anymore forms, man?” They curiously asked
“Yes, man, cat, dog, raven, bat, goat, horse - like
Without feet, head, with wings, tails; horrible, terrible-”
They searched for a long but found nothing around.

Since the dawn of human beings in the earth
Some unknown, ill adventurous, life threatening, 
Blood sucking, thrilling stories are heard as legends, 
Tales, fictions, ceremonies time, place concerned
Awful ghost stories and terrific ghosts are of those
Though the figure of those have never been seen.

At the serial development of the ancient societies
Ghosts developed themselves too in new forms,
In human mind quite consciously or subconsciously,
Even in the period of this acute science, the ghosts
Exist and certainly will be by future generations
To threaten them, violating peace and conditions.

Worldwide ghosts are experienced in many ways
In thoughts, dreams of humans even in calling and
Making them appeared, obedient, or catching just
Exorcising from possessed persons’ body and mind
So there is an ill relation between ghost and human
Thus, the ghosts have taken a strong place in history.

Worldwide ghost story writers write stories, dramas
Ghost games makers produce multi-themed, taste,
Amazing, horrible games in the light of science
To entertain all aged persons equally in all times
With earning much means, funs, name and fame;
With some uneven, magical, tough and difficulties
They claim achieving some remarkable potentialities
Hoping to be immortal through those fancy writings,
Sometimes, fortunately they become potential
By illegal verdict lacking of legal judgment of judges. 

Thus, a lot of modern stories, events, researches,
Theories, ideas, facts, human activities resemble
Those ghosts and ghost stories having no validity,
Reality; again none is benefitted from those stuffs,
But many are disturbed mentally and in other ways
That cause physically alive but spiritually fatal dead.

Fascinated readers to be amused read in leisures
But, in whimsy they are often haunted by the ghosts,
Being overwhelmed they become ghost story writers
Precious time passed on playing with clay and sand.
