
MUSCLE ENVY ANIMUS

Muscle Envy Animus

When I was a child, I played under sky
Climbing trees for mangoes high
Or chasing after a butterfly
I’d call my sis, but she’d only sigh
For she preferred to stay indoors
Playing with dolls, she was such a bore!

For dolls and tea sets I did not care
But I had a single teddy bear
Dragged around by his scruffy brown hair
He joined in my games of seek and dare
Lego blocks, we agreed, were the toys
Starting school, I was one of the boys.

But in the rough and tumble of play
Emerged the true colors of the day
With my thoughts in a sex disarray
I blamed mother and to her I did say
Why oh why, did you make me a girl?
Child, at God, your angst you should hurl!

So with my creator I went on a tirade
All words of praise were put on blockade
I was a club when I should have been a spade!
How could the ‘all knowing’, my soul, abrade?
Silently warring, I plotted plans so animus
On how I could live, anima-minus!

Resolved, I played as hard as the males
The challenge was in the hills and dales
All fine till puberty tipped the scales
And muscle envy became a part of my tale
How easy for them came the strength
While I had to work at such lengths

To this day I still work to preserve
The little of muscle I was served
Both loving and hating it, I observe
The fine and the brutish with verve
For many a well-muscled fellow
Turned a beautiful bull, not mellow

That striated skeletal fibrous cell 
Condemning the weaker half to sell
The strong playing tunes from hell
So I guard my animus very well
It is a most precious half of me
To fight off the many bullies I see.

I am still at war with my maker
I ponder centuries of such stinkers
No end to the number of takers
All male, from philosophers to bakers!
And the greatest fable conceived
Of the evil that was dear oh deary, Eve!

So I’ll say my prayers out in nature
And no preacher but truth I’ll nurture
Animus preserve in girls for the future
For boys are still programmed to torture
I pray for mothers who had no choice
As life’s bearers, why, the null voice?


(5/20/2016 - Munaajaat with Marsiya rhyme stanzas)

