
The Light

It was supposed to be an ordinary day,
And I couldn’t have it any other way.
I kissed my mother goodbye with her smile so sublime.
I didn’t know it would be for the last time.

That evening was sweet with my dear friends around me,
Bright and breezy in such a pleasant company.
The music and the mood uplifted my spirits so high
I felt I could just spread my wings and fly.

I was young and free, though decent and sensible,
And strived to make my ways so respectable.
But so abrupt was my young life taken away
By the hands of men disturbed in their evil display.

With such noise, fury, fear and pain,
Life was looked down in wicked disdain.
In quest of arms and shoulders to grieve and cry,
Our family and friends kept asking the question why.

All that is left is the enduring memory
Of a young heart with a noble destiny.
But don’t let broken promises and unheard laughter
Be the sign of your life to live forever.

Remember me as being grateful, honest and happy,
And we’ll all cherish our bonds through eternity.
Time will go by with no birthdays or Christmas wishes
We used to share with mummy’s lovely dishes.

Please carry on living and loving as I watch over you,
From above with the angels watching with affection too.
The time will come when we see each other again,
And eternally stand as the unbreakable golden chain.

We’ll share the smiles, the laughter and the tears of joy
And you’ll reminisce all about your favourite boy.
We’ll forget the sadness, the pain and the fears
And you’ll finally dry the few remaining tears.

Though short and broken, you made my life cheerful, 
Now seek to make yours content and peaceful.
I was gone too soon, but not alone nor afraid.
For my demise you cried and for my soul you prayed.

I am still in your hearts, so seek to cry no more,
For you will stay in mine, just like you’ve been before.
So, when you look up in the sky, by day or by night
Care to disregard the dark and you will see the light.
