
Apple Orchard

Young Timmy saw Jim walking down the street.  Timmy dreaded the sight of Jim, a teenaged bully who always picked on him.  Jim grew close, sure enough approaching Timmy who braced for whatever Jim might say or do.

“Hey, Punk,” Jim began, “Whatcha’ doin’ for Halloween tonight?”

“Gonna trick or treat with my friends.”

Jim scowled, “Nah, I don’t think so ‘cause you’re goin’ with me.”

“Going where?” Timmy matched Jim’s stare, but not his tone.

“For a fright – woo, hoo and boo!  Heard at school that you know a short cut to McGregor’s apple orchid and I wanna go.”  Jim stepped closer to Timmy.

Timmy swallowed, “But three people have disappeared from there, they say, and lots more before we were even born.  Haven’t you heard the stories?”

Jim finally smiled, “Yep, that’s why I wanna go.  It’s perfect for Halloween.”

“I don’t think so.  They say if strangers sneak up on the trees, they disappear in apple leaves.  I best just trick or treat.”

Again, Jim stepped closer to Timmy, “Tonight we’ll see what’s true.  I know you’re hot for Dana May – ya want me to tell her you cried, scared like a baby?”  Another step closer took him inches from Timmy’s face, “SOOOO?”

Timmy fidgeted, kicked the dusty ground, he looked down, then up again at Jim’s eyes, “Okay, meet me tonight at first dark on your bike.”

“I thought so – see ya in front of the drug store, Shorty.” Jim said, already walking away.

Later, at first dark, when Timmy pedaled up to the drug store, Jim was already waiting on his 10-speed bike.  Jim greeted Timmy with, “Okay, let’s go.  I’ll follow you.”  Timmy said nothing, just took off with Jim on his heels.

They bicycled thru the uneven grounds in the woods that surrounded their hometown.  Timmy was aware of his quick heartbeat telling on his nerves the whole trip.  After a good forty-five minutes of pedaling, Timmy finally pulled up to the fence that surrounded the apple orchard and all the other acres belonging to Farmer McGregor.  In silence, the younger and older boy dismounted.  

Timmy turned to Jim, “Do you want me to lead you into the orchard, too?”

“Yep, I’d have it no other way,” Jim’s smile looked evil.

Timmy went over the fence with Jim on his heels and walked among the apple trees, finally stopping at one tree that stood taller than the others.  When Jim stepped up, by his side, Timmy said, “If you climb first and nothin’ happens, I’ll start climbing, too.”

Jim actually snorted, “Man, you’re so nervous, you might bust like a scare-filled tick.   Follow or not up the tree, Shorty, just don’t panic and leave me ‘cause I wanna use your shortcut back home, got that?”

“I do, so if’n I don’t climb, I’ll stay put right here,” said Timmy.  He added, “Don’t pick or throw the apples, that’s bound to make the tree mad.”

“Then I surely will pick them, then throw them AT YOU,” with that comment, Jim was gone up the tree.  

The night had grown pitch black, even the moon provided very little light this Halloween.  Timmy could make out Jim’s form as it climbed and disappeared into the branches.  Just as Timmy lost sight of him in the tree, Jim began to pick and throw apples at Timmy.  A strange sound cut through the air and the apple onslaught ended. 

Timmy remained in his spot, eyes fixed on the tree, he heard the strange sound again and ignored his legs that begged to bolt.  Jim was silent.

Timmy kept his stare pointed intently at the tree.   Again, the weird sound came and suddenly, Farmer McGregor’s face appeared in the trunk bark, accompanied by an unhuman-like burp and the swelling of the tree trunk.  Timmy turned and ran for his bike as fast he could go.

Home.  Timmy’s adrenaline was soaring and he couldn’t remember his anxious ride through the forest.  He ran to his bedroom, shut the door and pulled a notebook out from under his bed.  He opened it to a page that in his childish handwriting, read:

Sally, my mean teenage babysitter – XXX
Stan, his banker Dad did not give my Dad a loan – XXX
Danny, shot my dog with his BB pistol – XXX
Jim, the awful bully

Grabbing a pen, Timmy wrote 3 Xs after, “Jim, the awful bully.”




October 6, 2016
Scare Me Good Contest 






