
Sapiosexual

I am sexually attracted to intelligence.

Intimate conversations springing from an

eloquent mind, undressing my conscience

and making love to my thoughts.

Giving me cerebral stimulating orgasms from

live interchange of mind blowing discussions,

direct transmissions tickling my wordsmith

senses in a sensual word play where our

thoughts wrestle with our feelings in an

intellectual parlance.

 
I am sexually attracted to an intelligent man.

Constantly lost in a mind mating game as our

thoughts converge into a cosmic fusion.

Minds stretching like binary stars into a galaxy.

Swimming in an ocean of philosophy and

psychology, a sea of brilliant ideas, and waltzing

in a forest of opportunities in an analytical love

nest oozing theories and bleeding facts.

High on a love that ravishes me with every

word as i am overcome by extensive vocabulary.

Giving eargasms that constrict our ears and make

our minds bind in soul sex.

 

Piqued interest, thoughtfully attuned to a peculiar

woman like me.

Enticing my nerves with explosive conversations.

Taking me on an enthralling thoughtful journey to

expose the wonders of the mind.

Through detours of logic, truth, and sensuality

intertwined in blissful knowledge.

Re-routing the superficial fake sexual game that

men played with me.

 
I am sexually attracted to intelligence.

Of two sapiosexual lovers intoxicated in passion,

building creative juices and releasing intellectual

vibrations, climaxing from mental stimulation.

Caressing my flesh with cognitive poetry from

emotions existent as i turn him up in a deep

Spoken word poetry recital about the world.

Educating him, giving him something to meditate

on.

Intriguing me with his beautiful mind, provoking

my thoughts, arousing neurons as the synapses

of our brains perform intricate dances.

Beats become one resonating cadence.

Fusion of musical instruments as our thoughts

swirl and create a harmonious rhythm in a deep

orgasmic mind dance in a world experiencing

the worst sexual revolution.

 
A world where physical beauty is overrated and

intelligence is underrated.

Enslaved minds hooked to fleeting passion and

the physical facade like the magic herb.

Ignorance that muddles the mind.

 

A world where intelligent women are intimidating

and labeled, “Miss Know it all or Big headed”

A world where intelligent men are intimidating

and labeled, “Mr. Know it all or proud”.

 

In a world where a Sapiosexual woman like me dwells.

