Small was thy share of all this world's delight
And scant thy poet's crown of flowers of praise;
Yet ever catches quaint of quaint old days
Thou sang'st, and, singing, kept thy spirit bright
Even as to lips the winds of winter bite
Some outcast wanderer sets his flute and plays
Till at his feet blossom the icy ways,
And from the snowdrift's bitter wasting white
He hears the uprising carol of the lark,
Soaring from clover seas with summer ripe--
While freeze upon his cheek glad, foolish tears.
Ah! let us hope that somewhere in thy dark,
Herrick's full note, and Suckling's pleasant pipe,
Are sounding still their solace in thine ears.

A thousand fans are fretting the hot air;      
Soft swells the music of the interlude      
Above the murmurous hum of talk subdued;      
But, from the noise withdrawn and from the glare,      
Deep in the shadowy box your coilčd hair      
Gleams golden bright, with diamonds bedewed;      
Your head is bent; I know your dark eyes brood      
On the poor sheet of paper you hold there,
That quotes my verses, and I see no more      
That bald-head Plutus by your side.  The seas      
Sound in my ears; I hear the rustling pines;      
Catch the low lisp of billows on the shore      
Where once I lay in Knickerbockered ease,      
And read to you those then unprinted lines. 

As to a bird's song she were listening,             
Her beautiful head is ever sidewise bent;             
Her questioning eyes lift up their depths intent              
She, who will never hear the wild-birds sing.             
My words within her ears' cold chambers ring             
Faint, with the city's murmurous sub-tones blent;             
Though with such sounds as suppliants may have sent            
To high-throned goddesses, my speech takes wing.             
Not for the side-poised head's appealing grace             
I gaze, nor hair where fire in shadow lies              
For her this world's unhallowed noises base             
Melt into silence; not our groans, our cries,             
Our curses, reach that high-removčd place             
Where dwells her spirit, innocently wise.             

There is an  hour when first the westering sun             
Takes on  some forecast faint of future red;             
When from  the wings of weariness is shed             
A  spell upon us toilers, every one;             
The day's  work lags a little, well-nigh done;             
Far dusky lofts  through all the close air spread             
A smell of  eastern bales; the old clerk's head             
Nods by  my side, heavy with dreams begun             
In dear dead  days wherein his heart is tombed.             
But I  my way to Italy have found;             
Or wander  where high stars gleam coldly through             
The Alpine  skies; or in some nest perfumed,             
With soft Parisian luxury set round,             
Held out my arms  and cry "At last!" to you.             

Although  a curtain of the salt sea-mist             
May fall between the actor and our eyes              
Although he change for dear and softer skies             
These that the sun has yet but coyly kissed              
Although the voice to which we loved to list             
Fail ere the thunder of our plaudits dies              
Although he parts from us in gracious wise,             
With grateful memory left his eulogist              
His best is with us still. His perfect art             
Has held us betwixt a heart-throb and a tear              
Cheating our souls to passionate belief.             
And in his greatness we have now some part              
We have been courtiers of the crownless Lear,             
And partners in Othello's mighty grief.             

As to   the  drunkard who at morn doth wake             
Are   the  clear waters of the virgin spring             
Wherewith he   bathes  his eyes that burn and sting             
And his intolerable thirst doth slake,             
So is the   thought  of thee to me, who break             
One sober moment, sick and shuddering,             
From  all my life's unworthiness, to fling             
Me at   thy  memory's feet, and for Love's sake             
Pray that   thy  peace may enter in my soul.             
Love, thou   hast  heart!  My veins more calmly flow              
The   madness  of the night is passed away              
Fire   of   false  eyes, thirst of the cursčd bowl              
I   drink  deep of thy purity, and lo!             
Thou hast   given me  new heart to meet the day.              