
 NOW joy for you who from the towers
 
 Of Brancepeth look in doubt and fear,
 
 Telling melancholy hours!
 
 Proclaim it, let your Masters hear
 
 That Norton with his band is near!
 
 The watchmen from their station high
 
 Pronounced the word,--and the Earls descry,
 
 Well-pleased, the armed Company
 
 Marching down the banks of Were.
 
 Said fearless Norton to the pair
 
 Gone forth to greet him on the plain--
 
 'This meeting, noble Lords! looks fair,
 
 I bring with me a goodly train;
 
 Their hearts are with you: hill and dale
 
 Have helped us: Ure we crossed, and Swale,
 
 And horse and harness followed--see
 
 The best part of their Yeomanry!
 
 --Stand forth, my Sons!--these eight are mine,
 
 Whom to this service I commend;
 
 Which way soe'er our fate incline,
 
 These will be faithful to the end;
 
 They are my all'--voice failed him here--
 
 'My all save one, a Daughter dear!
 
 Whom I have left, Love's mildest birth,
 
 The meekest Child on this blessed earth.
 
 I had--but these are by my side,
 
 These Eight, and this is a day of pride!
 
 The time is ripe. With festive din
 
 Lo! how the people are flocking in,--
 
 Like hungry fowl to the feeder's hand
 
 When snow lies heavy upon the land.'
 
 He spake bare truth; for far and near
 
 From every side came noisy swarms
 
 Of Peasants in their homely gear;
 
 And, mixed with these, to Brancepeth came
 
 Grave Gentry of estate and name,
 
 And Captains known for worth in arms
 
 And prayed the Earls in self-defence
 
 To rise, and prove their innocence.--
 
 'Rise, noble Earls, put forth your might
 
 For holy Church, and the People's right!'
 
 The Norton fixed, at this demand,
 
 His eye upon Northumberland,
 
 And said; 'The Minds of Men will own
 
 No loyal rest while England's Crown
 
 Remains without an Heir, the bait
 
 Of strife and factions desperate;
 
 Who, paying deadly hate in kind
 
 Through all things else, in this can find
 
 A mutual hope, a common mind;
 
 And plot, and pant to overwhelm
 
 All ancient honour in the realm.
 
 --Brave Earls! to whose heroic veins
 
 Our noblest blood is given in trust,
 
 To you a suffering State complains,
 
 And ye must raise her from the dust.
 
 With wishes of still bolder scope
 
 On you we look, with dearest hope;
 
 Even for our Altars--for the prize,
 
 In Heaven, of life that never dies;
 
 For the old and holy Church we mourn,
 
 And must in joy to her return.
 
 Behold!'--and from his Son whose stand
 
 Was on his right, from that guardian hand
 
 He took the Banner, and unfurled
 
 The precious folds--'behold,' said he,
 
 'The ransom of a sinful world;
 
 Let this your preservation be;
 
 The wounds of hands and feet and side,
 
 And the sacred Cross on which Jesus died.
 
 --This bring I from an ancient hearth,
 
 These Records wrought in pledge of love
 
 By hands of no ignoble birth,
 
 A Maid o'er whom the blessed Dove
 
 Vouchsafed in gentleness to brood
 
 While she the holy work pursued.'
 
 'Uplift the Standard!' was the cry
 
 From all the listeners that stood round,
 
 'Plant it,--by this we live or die.'
 
 The Norton ceased not for that sound,
 
 But said; 'The prayer which ye have heard,
 
 Much-injured Earls! by these preferred,
 
 Is offered to the Saints, the sigh
 
 Of tens of thousands, secretly.'
 
 'Uplift it!' cried once more the Band,
 
 And then a thoughtful pause ensued:
 
 'Uplift it!' said Northumberland--
 
 Whereat, from all the multitude
 
 Who saw the Banner reared on high
 
 In all its dread emblazonry,
 
 A voice of uttermost joy brake out:
 
 The transport was rolled down the river of Were,
 
 And Durham, the time-honoured Durham, did hear,
 
 And the towers of Saint Cuthbert were stirred by the shout!
 
 Now was the North in arms:--they shine
 
 In warlike trim from Tweed to Tyne,
 
 At Percy's voice: and Neville sees
 
 His Followers gathering in from Tees,
 
 From Were, and all the little rills
 
 Concealed among the forked hills--
 
 Seven hundred Knights, Retainers all
 
 Of Neville, at their Master's call
 
 Had sate together in Raby Hall!
 
 Such strength that Earldom held of yore;
 
 Nor wanted at this time rich store
 
 Of well-appointed chivalry.
 
 --Not loth the sleepy lance to wield,
 
 And greet the old paternal shield,
 
 They heard the summons;--and, furthermore,
 
 Horsemen and Foot of each degree,
 
 Unbound by pledge of fealty,
 
 Appeared, with free and open hate
 
 Of novelties in Church and State;
 
 Knight, burgher, yeoman, and esquire;
 
 And Romish priest, in priest's attire.
 
 And thus, in arms, a zealous Band
 
 Proceeding under joint command,
 
 To Durham first their course they bear;
 
 And in Saint Cuthbert's ancient seat
 
 Sang mass,--and tore the book of prayer,--
 
 And trod the bible beneath their feet.
 
 Thence marching southward smooth and free
 
 'They mustered their host at Wetherby,
 
 Full sixteen thousand fair to see,'
 
 The Choicest Warriors of the North!
 
 But none for beauty and for worth
 
 Like those eight Sons--who, in a ring,
 
 (Ripe men, or blooming in life's spring)
 
 Each with a lance, erect and tall,
 
 A falchion, and a buckler small,
 
 Stood by their Sire, on Clifford-moor,
 
 To guard the Standard which he bore.
 
 On foot they girt their Father round;
 
 And so will keep the appointed ground
 
 Where'er their march: no steed will he
 
 Henceforth bestride;--triumphantly,
 
 He stands upon the grassy sod,
 
 Trusting himself to the earth, and God.
 
 Rare sight to embolden and inspire!
 
 Proud was the field of Sons and Sire;
 
 Of him the most; and, sooth to say,
 
 No shape of man in all the array
 
 So graced the sunshine of that day.
 
 The monumental pomp of age
 
 Was with this goodly Personage;
 
 A stature undepressed in size,
 
 Unbent, which rather seemed to rise,
 
 In open victory o'er the weight
 
 Of seventy years, to loftier height;
 
 Magnific limbs of withered state;
 
 A face to fear and venerate;
 
 Eyes dark and strong; and on his head
 
 Bright locks of silver hair, thick spread,
 
 Which a brown morion half-concealed,
 
 Light as a hunter's of the field;
 
 And thus, with girdle round his waist,
 
 Whereon the Banner-staff might rest
 
 At need, he stood, advancing high
 
 The glittering, floating Pageantry.
 
 Who sees him?--thousands see, and One
 
 With unparticipated gaze;
 
 Who, 'mong those thousands, friend hath none,
 
 And treads in solitary ways.
 
 He, following wheresoe'er he might,
 
 Hath watched the Banner from afar,
 
 As shepherds watch a lonely star,
 
 Or mariners the distant light
 
 That guides them through a stormy night.
 
 And now, upon a chosen plot
 
 Of rising ground, yon heathy spot!
 
 He takes alone his far-off stand,
 
 With breast unmailed, unweaponed hand.
 
 Bold is his aspect; but his eye
 
 Is pregnant with anxiety,
 
 While, like a tutelary Power,
 
 He there stands fixed from hour to hour:
 
 Yet sometimes in more humble guise,
 
 Upon the turf-clad height he lies
 
 Stretched, herdsman-like, as if to bask
 
 In sunshine were his only task,
 
 Or by his mantle's help to find
 
 A shelter from the nipping wind:
 
 And thus, with short oblivion blest,
 
 His weary spirits gather rest.
 
 Again he lifts his eyes; and lo!
 
 The pageant glancing to and fro;
 
 And hope is wakened by the sight,
 
 He thence may learn, ere fall of night,
 
 Which way the tide is doomed to flow.
 
 To London were the Chieftains bent;
 
 But what avails the bold intent?
 
 A Royal army is gone forth
 
 To quell the RISING OF THE NORTH;
 
 They march with Dudley at their head,
 
 And, in seven days' space, will to York be led!--
 
 Can such a mighty Host be raised
 
 Thus suddenly, and brought so near?
 
 The Earls upon each other gazed,
 
 And Neville's cheek grew pale with fear;
 
 For, with a high and valiant name,
 
 He bore a heart of timid frame;
 
 And bold if both had been, yet they
 
 'Against so many may not stay.'
 
 Back therefore will they hie to seize
 
 A strong Hold on the banks of Tees
 
 There wait a favourable hour,
 
 Until Lord Dacre with his power
 
 From Naworth come; and Howard's aid
 
 Be with them openly displayed.
 
 While through the Host, from man to man,
 
 A rumour of this purpose ran,
 
 The Standard trusting to the care
 
 Of him who heretofore did bear
 
 That charge, impatient Norton sought
 
 The Chieftains to unfold his thought,
 
 And thus abruptly spake;--'We yield
 
 (And can it be?) an unfought field!--
 
 How oft has strength, the strength of heaven,
 
 To few triumphantly been given!
 
 Still do our very children boast
 
 Of mitred Thurston--what a Host
 
 He conquered!--Saw we not the Plain
 
 (And flying shall behold again)
 
 Where faith was proved?--while to battle moved
 
 The Standard, on the Sacred Wain
 
 That bore it, compassed round by a bold
 
 Fraternity of Barons old;
 
 And with those grey-haired champions stood,
 
 Under the saintly ensigns three,
 
 The infant Heir of Mowbray's blood--
 
 All confident of victory!--
 
 Shall Percy blush, then, for his name?
 
 Must Westmoreland be asked with shame
 
 Whose were the numbers, where the loss,
 
 In that other day of Neville's Cross?
 
 When the Prior of Durham with holy hand
 
 Raised, as the Vision gave command,
 
 Saint Cuthbert's Relic--far and near
 
 Kenned on the point of a lofty spear;
 
 While the Monks prayed in Maiden's Bower
 
 To God descending in his power.
 
 Less would not at our need be due
 
 To us, who war against the Untrue;--
 
 The delegates of Heaven we rise,
 
 Convoked the impious to chastise:
 
 We, we, the sanctities of old
 
 Would re-establish and uphold:
 
 Be warned'--His zeal the Chiefs confounded,
 
 But word was given, and the trumpet sounded:
 
 Back through the melancholy Host
 
 Went Norton, and resumed his post.
 
 Alas! thought he, and have I borne
 
 This Banner raised with joyful pride,
 
 This hope of all posterity,
 
 By those dread symbols sanctified;
 
 Thus to become at once the scorn
 
 Of babbling winds as they go by,
 
 A spot of shame to the sun's bright eye,
 
 To the light clouds a mockery!
 
 --'Even these poor eight of mine would stem--'
 
 Half to himself, and half to them
 
 He spake--'would stem, or quell, a force
 
 Ten times their number, man and horse:
 
 This by their own unaided might,
 
 Without their father in their sight,
 
 Without the Cause for which they fight;
 
 A Cause, which on a needful day
 
 Would breed us thousands brave as they.'
 
 --So speaking, he his reverend head
 
 Raised towards that Imagery once more:
 
 But the familiar prospect shed
 
 Despondency unfelt before:
 
 A shock of intimations vain,
 
 Dismay, and superstitious pain,
 
 Fell on him, with the sudden thought
 
 Of her by whom the work was wrought:--
 
 Oh wherefore was her countenance bright
 
 With love divine and gentle light?
 
 She would not, could not, disobey,
 
 But her Faith leaned another way.
 
 Ill tears she wept; I saw them fall,
 
 I overheard her as she spake
 
 Sad words to that mute Animal,
 
 The White Doe, in the hawthorn brake;
 
 She steeped, but not for Jesu's sake,
 
 This Cross in tears: by her, and One
 
 Unworthier far we are undone--
 
 Her recreant Brother--he prevailed
 
 Over that tender Spirit--assailed
 
 Too oft, alas! by her whose head
 
 In the cold grave hath long been laid:
 
 She first, in reason's dawn beguiled
 
 Her docile, unsuspecting Child:
 
 Far back--far back my mind must go
 
 To reach the well-spring of this woe!
 
 While thus he brooded, music sweet
 
 Of border tunes was played to cheer
 
 The footsteps of a quick retreat;
 
 But Norton lingered in the rear,
 
 Stung with sharp thoughts; and ere the last
 
 From his distracted brain was cast,
 
 Before his Father, Francis stood,
 
 And spake in firm and earnest mood.
 
 'Though here I bend a suppliant knee
 
 In reverence, and unarmed, I bear
 
 In your indignant thoughts my share;
 
 Am grieved this backward march to see
 
 So careless and disorderly.
 
 I scorn your Chiefs--men who would lead,
 
 And yet want courage at their need:
 
 Then look at them with open eyes!
 
 Deserve they further sacrifice?--
 
 If--when they shrink, nor dare oppose
 
 In open field their gathering foes,
 
 (And fast, from this decisive day,
 
 Yon multitude must melt away
 
 If now I ask a grace not claimed
 
 While ground was left for hope; unblamed
 
 Be an endeavour that can do
 
 No injury to them or you.
 
 My Father! I would help to find
 
 A place of shelter, till the rage
 
 Of cruel men do like the wind
 
 Exhaust itself and sink to rest;
 
 Be Brother now to Brother joined!
 
 Admit me in the equipage
 
 Of your misfortunes, that at least,
 
 Whatever fate remain behind,
 
 I may bear witness in my breast
 
 To your nobility of mind!'
 
 'Thou Enemy, my bane and blight!
 
 Oh! bold to fight the Coward's fight
 
 Against all good'--but why declare,
 
 At length, the issue of a prayer
 
 Which love had prompted, yielding scope
 
 Too free to one bright moment's hope?
 
 Suffice it that the Son, who strove
 
 With fruitless effort to allay
 
 That passion, prudently gave way;
 
 Nor did he turn aside to prove
 
 His Brothers' wisdom or their love--
 
 But calmly from the spot withdrew;
 
 His best endeavours to renew,
 
 Should e'er a kindlier time ensue.
 

