
 THE Harp in lowliness obeyed;
 
 And first we sang of the greenwood shade
 
 And a solitary Maid;
 
 Beginning, where the song must end,
 
 With her, and with her sylvan Friend;
 
 The Friend who stood before her sight,
 
 Her only unextinguished light;
 
 Her last companion in a dearth
 
 Of love, upon a hopeless earth.
 
 For She it was--this Maid, who wrought
 
 Meekly, with foreboding thought,
 
 In vermeil colours and in gold
 
 An unblest work; which, standing by,
 
 Her Father did with joy behold,--
 
 Exulting in its imagery;
 
 A Banner, fashioned to fulfil
 
 Too perfectly his headstrong will:
 
 For on this Banner had her hand
 
 Embroidered (such her Sire's command)
 
 The sacred Cross; and figured there
 
 The five dear wounds our Lord did bear;
 
 Full soon to be uplifted high,
 
 And float in rueful company!
 
 It was the time when England's Queen
 
 Twelve years had reigned, a Sovereign dread;
 
 Nor yet the restless crown had been
 
 Disturbed upon her virgin head;
 
 But now the inly-working North
 
 Was ripe to send its thousands forth,
 
 A potent vassalage, to fight
 
 In Percy's and in Neville's right,
 
 Two Earls fast leagued in discontent,
 
 Who gave their wishes open vent;
 
 And boldly urged a general plea,
 
 The rites of ancient piety
 
 To be triumphantly restored,
 
 By the stern justice of the sword!
 
 And that same Banner, on whose breast
 
 The blameless Lady had exprest
 
 Memorials chosen to give life
 
 And sunshine to a dangerous strife;
 
 That Banner, waiting for the Call,
 
 Stood quietly in Rylstone-hall.
 
 It came; and Francis Norton said,
 
 'O Father! rise not in this fray--
 
 The hairs are white upon your head;
 
 Dear Father, hear me when I say
 
 It is for you too late a day!
 
 Bethink you of your own good name:
 
 A just and gracious Queen have we,
 
 A pure religion, and the claim
 
 Of peace on our humanity.--
 
 'Tis meet that I endure your scorn;
 
 I am your son, your eldest born;
 
 But not for lordship or for land,
 
 My Father, do I clasp your knees;
 
 The Banner touch not, stay your hand,
 
 This multitude of men disband,
 
 And live at home in blameless ease;
 
 For these my brethren's sake, for me;
 
 And, most of all, for Emily!'
 
 Tumultuous noises filled the hall;
 
 And scarcely could the Father hear
 
 That name--pronounced with a dying fall--
 
 The name of his only Daughter dear,
 
 As on the banner which stood near
 
 He glanced a look of holy pride,
 
 And his moist eyes were glorified;
 
 Then did he seize the staff, and say:
 
 'Thou, Richard, bear'st thy father's name,
 
 Keep thou this ensign till the day
 
 When I of thee require the same:
 
 Thy place be on my better hand;--
 
 And seven as true as thou, I see,
 
 Will cleave to this good cause and me.'
 
 He spake, and eight brave sons straightway
 
 All followed him, a gallant band!
 
 Thus, with his sons, when forth he came
 
 The sight was hailed with loud acclaim
 
 And din of arms and minstrelsy,
 
 From all his warlike tenantry,
 
 All horsed and harnessed with him to ride,--
 
 A voice to which the hills replied!
 
 But Francis, in the vacant hall,
 
 Stood silent under dreary weight,--
 
 A phantasm, in which roof and wall
 
 Shook, tottered, swam before his sight;
 
 A phantasm like a dream of night!
 
 Thus overwhelmed, and desolate,
 
 He found his way to a postern-gate;
 
 And, when he waked, his languid eye
 
 Was on the calm and silent sky;
 
 With air about him breathing sweet,
 
 And earth's green grass beneath his feet;
 
 Nor did he fail ere long to hear
 
 A sound of military cheer,
 
 Faint--but it reached that sheltered spot;
 
 He heard, and it disturbed him not.
 
 There stood he, leaning on a lance
 
 Which he had grasped unknowingly,
 
 Had blindly grasped in that strong trance,
 
 That dimness of heart-agony;
 
 There stood he, cleansed from the despair
 
 And sorrow of his fruitless prayer.
 
 The past he calmly hath reviewed:
 
 But where will be the fortitude
 
 Of this brave man, when he shall see
 
 That Form beneath the spreading tree,
 
 And know that it is Emily?
 
 He saw her where in open view
 
 She sate beneath the spreading yew--
 
 Her head upon her lap, concealing
 
 In solitude her bitter feeling:
 
 'Might ever son 'command' a sire,
 
 The act were justified to-day.'
 
 This to himself--and to the Maid,
 
 Whom now he had approached, he said--
 
 'Gone are they,--they have their desire;
 
 And I with thee one hour will stay,
 
 To give thee comfort if I may.'
 
 She heard, but looked not up, nor spake;
 
 And sorrow moved him to partake
 
 Her silence; then his thoughts turned round,
 
 And fervent words a passage found.
 
 'Gone are they, bravely, though misled;
 
 With a dear Father at their head!
 
 The Sons obey a natural lord;
 
 The Father had given solemn word
 
 To noble Percy; and a force
 
 Still stronger, bends him to his course.
 
 This said, our tears to-day may fall
 
 As at an innocent funeral.
 
 In deep and awful channel runs
 
 This sympathy of Sire and Sons;
 
 Untried our Brothers have been loved
 
 With heart by simple nature moved;
 
 And now their faithfulness is proved:
 
 For faithful we must call them, bearing
 
 That soul of conscientious daring.
 
 --There were they all in circle--there
 
 Stood Richard, Ambrose, Christopher,
 
 John with a sword that will not fail,
 
 And Marmaduke in fearless mail,
 
 And those bright Twins were side by side;
 
 And there, by fresh hopes beautified,
 
 Stood He, whose arm yet lacks the power
 
 Of man, our youngest, fairest flower!
 
 I, by the right of eldest born,
 
 And in a second father's place,
 
 Presumed to grapple with their scorn,
 
 And meet their pity face to face;
 
 Yea, trusting in God's holy aid,
 
 I to my Father knelt and prayed;
 
 And one, the pensive Marmaduke,
 
 Methought, was yielding inwardly,
 
 And would have laid his purpose by,
 
 But for a glance of his Father's eye,
 
 Which I myself could scarcely brook.
 
 Then be we, each and all, forgiven!
 
 Thou, chiefly thou, my Sister dear,
 
 Whose pangs are registered in heaven--
 
 The stifled sigh, the hidden tear,
 
 And smiles, that dared to take their place,
 
 Meek filial smiles, upon thy face,
 
 As that unhallowed Banner grew
 
 Beneath a loving old Man's view.
 
 Thy part is done--thy painful part;
 
 Be thou then satisfied in heart!
 
 A further, though far easier, task
 
 Than thine hath been, my duties ask;
 
 With theirs my efforts cannot blend,
 
 I cannot for such cause contend;
 
 Their aims I utterly forswear;
 
 But I in body will be there.
 
 Unarmed and naked will I go,
 
 Be at their side, come weal or woe:
 
 On kind occasions I may wait,
 
 See, hear, obstruct, or mitigate.
 
 Bare breast I take and an empty hand.'--
 
 Therewith he threw away the lance,
 
 Which he had grasped in that strong trance,
 
 Spurned it, like something that would stand
 
 Between him and the pure intent
 
 Of love on which his soul was bent.
 
 'For thee, for thee, is left the sense
 
 Of trial past without offence
 
 To God or man; such innocence,
 
 Such consolation, and the excess
 
 Of an unmerited distress;
 
 In that thy very strength must lie.
 
 --O Sister, I could prophesy!
 
 The time is come that rings the knell
 
 Of all we loved, and loved so well:
 
 Hope nothing, if I thus may speak
 
 To thee, a woman, and thence weak:
 
 Hope nothing, I repeat; for we
 
 Are doomed to perish utterly:
 
 'Tis meet that thou with me divide
 
 The thought while I am by thy side,
 
 Acknowledging a grace in this,
 
 A comfort in the dark abyss.
 
 But look not for me when I am gone,
 
 And be no farther wrought upon:
 
 Farewell all wishes, all debate,
 
 All prayers for this cause, or for that!
 
 Weep, if that aid thee; but depend
 
 Upon no help of outward friend;
 
 Espouse thy doom at once, and cleave
 
 To fortitude without reprieve.
 
 For we must fall, both we and ours--
 
 This Mansion and these pleasant bowers,
 
 Walks, pools, and arbours, homestead, hall--
 
 Our fate is theirs, will reach them all;
 
 The young horse must forsake his manger,
 
 And learn to glory in a Stranger;
 
 The hawk forget his perch; the hound
 
 Be parted from his ancient ground:
 
 The blast will sweep us all away--
 
 One desolation, one decay!
 
 And even this Creature!' which words saying,
 
 He pointed to a lovely Doe,
 
 A few steps distant, feeding, straying;
 
 Fair creature, and more white than snow!
 
 'Even she will to her peaceful woods
 
 Return, and to her murmuring floods,
 
 And be in heart and soul the same
 
 She was before she hither came;
 
 Ere she had learned to love us all,
 
 Herself beloved in Rylstone-hall.
 
 --But thou, my Sister, doomed to be
 
 The last leaf on a blasted tree;
 
 If not in vain we breathed the breath
 
 Together of a purer faith;
 
 If hand in hand we have been led,
 
 And thou, (O happy thought this day
 
 Not seldom foremost in the way;
 
 If on one thought our minds have fed,
 
 And we have in one meaning read;
 
 If, when at home our private weal
 
 Hath suffered from the shock of zeal,
 
 Together we have learned to prize
 
 Forbearance and self-sacrifice;
 
 If we like combatants have fared,
 
 And for this issue been prepared;
 
 If thou art beautiful, and youth
 
 And thought endue thee with all truth--
 
 Be strong;--be worthy of the grace
 
 Of God, and fill thy destined place:
 
 A Soul, by force of sorrows high,
 
 Uplifted to the purest sky
 
 Of undisturbed humanity!'
 
 He ended,--or she heard no more;
 
 He led her from the yew-tree shade,
 
 And at the mansion's silent door,
 
 He kissed the consecrated Maid;
 
 And down the valley then pursued,
 
 Alone, the armed Multitude.
 

