
 'Tis night: in silence looking down,
 
 The Moon, from cloudless ether, sees
 
 A Camp, and a beleaguered Town,
 
 And Castle, like a stately crown
 
 On the steep rocks of winding Tees;--
 
 And southward far, with moor between,
 
 Hill-top, and flood, and forest green,
 
 The bright Moon sees that valley small
 
 Where Rylstone's old sequestered Hall
 
 A venerable image yields
 
 Of quiet to the neighbouring fields;
 
 While from one pillared chimney breathes
 
 The smoke, and mounts in silver wreaths.
 
 --The courts are hushed;--for timely sleep
 
 The greyhounds to their kennel creep;
 
 The peacock in the broad ash tree
 
 Aloft is roosted for the night,
 
 He who in proud prosperity
 
 Of colours manifold and bright
 
 Walked round, affronting the daylight;
 
 And higher still, above the bower
 
 Where he is perched, from yon lone Tower
 
 The hall-clock in the clear moonshine
 
 With glittering finger points at nine.
 
 Ah! who could think that sadness here
 
 Hath any sway? or pain, or fear?
 
 A soft and lulling sound is heard
 
 Of streams inaudible by day;
 
 The garden pool's dark surface, stirred
 
 By the night insects in their play,
 
 Breaks into dimples small and bright;
 
 A thousand, thousand rings of light
 
 That shape themselves and disappear
 
 Almost as soon as seen:--and lo!
 
 Not distant far, the milk-white Doe--
 
 The same who quietly was feeding
 
 On the green herb, and nothing heeding,
 
 When Francis, uttering to the Maid
 
 His last words in the yew-tree shade,
 
 Involved whate'er by love was brought
 
 Out of his heart, or crossed his thought,
 
 Or chance presented to his eye,
 
 In one sad sweep of destiny--
 
 The same fair Creature, who hath found
 
 Her way into forbidden ground;
 
 Where now--within this spacious plot
 
 For pleasure made, a goodly spot,
 
 With lawns and beds of flowers, and shades
 
 Of trellis-work in long arcades,
 
 And cirque and crescent framed by wall
 
 Of close-clipt foliage green and tall,
 
 Converging walks, and fountains gay,
 
 And terraces in trim array--
 
 Beneath yon cypress spiring high,
 
 With pine and cedar spreading wide
 
 Their darksome boughs on either side,
 
 In open moonlight doth she lie;
 
 Happy as others of her kind,
 
 That, far from human neighbourhood,
 
 Range unrestricted as the wind,
 
 Through park, or chase, or savage wood.
 
 But see the consecrated Maid
 
 Emerging from a cedar shade
 
 To open moonshine, where the Doe
 
 Beneath the cypress-spire is laid;
 
 Like a patch of April snow--
 
 Upon a bed of herbage green,
 
 Lingering in a woody glade
 
 Or behind a rocky screen--
 
 Lonely relic! which, if seen
 
 By the shepherd, is passed by
 
 With an inattentive eye.
 
 Nor more regard doth She bestow
 
 Upon the uncomplaining Doe
 
 Now couched at ease, though oft this day
 
 Not unperplexed nor free from pain,
 
 When she had tried, and tried in vain,
 
 Approaching in her gentle way,
 
 To win some look of love, or gain
 
 Encouragement to sport or play
 
 Attempts which still the heart-sick Maid
 
 Rejected, or with slight repaid.
 
 Yet Emily is soothed;--the breeze
 
 Came fraught with kindly sympathies.
 
 As she approached yon rustic Shed
 
 Hung with late-flowering woodbine, spread
 
 Along the walls and overhead,
 
 The fragrance of the breathing flowers
 
 Revived a memory of those hours
 
 When here, in this remote alcove,
 
 (While from the pendent woodbine came
 
 Like odours, sweet as if the same)
 
 A fondly-anxious Mother strove
 
 To teach her salutary fears
 
 And mysteries above her years.
 
 Yes, she is soothed: an Image faint,
 
 And yet not faint--a presence bright
 
 Returns to her--that blessed Saint
 
 Who with mild looks and language mild
 
 Instructed here her darling Child,
 
 While yet a prattler on the knee,
 
 To worship in simplicity
 
 The invisible God, and take for guide
 
 The faith reformed and purified.
 
 'Tis flown--the Vision, and the sense
 
 Of that beguiling influence,
 
 'But oh! thou Angel from above,
 
 Mute Spirit of maternal love,
 
 That stood'st before my eyes, more clear
 
 Than ghosts are fabled to appear
 
 Sent upon embassies of fear;
 
 As thou thy presence hast to me
 
 Vouchsafed, in radiant ministry
 
 Descend on Francis; nor forbear
 
 To greet him with a voice, and say;--
 
 'If hope be a rejected stay,
 
 'Do thou, my christian Son, beware
 
 'Of that most lamentable snare,
 
 'The self-reliance of despair!''
 
 Then from within the embowered retreat
 
 Where she had found a grateful seat
 
 Perturbed she issues. She will go!
 
 Herself will follow to the war,
 
 And clasp her Father's knees;--ah, no!
 
 She meets the insuperable bar,
 
 The injunction by her Brother laid;
 
 His parting charge--but ill obeyed--
 
 That interdicted all debate,
 
 All prayer for this cause or for that;
 
 All efforts that would turn aside
 
 The headstrong current of their fate:
 
 'Her duty is to stand and wait;'
 
 In resignation to abide
 
 The shock, AND FINALLY SECURE
 
 O'ER PAIN AND GRIEF A TRIUMPH PURE.
 
 --She feels it, and her pangs are checked.
 
 But now, as silently she paced
 
 The turf, and thought by thought was chased,
 
 Came One who, with sedate respect,
 
 Approached, and, greeting her, thus spake;
 
 'An old man's privilege I take:
 
 Dark is the time--a woeful day!
 
 Dear daughter of affliction, say
 
 How can I serve you? point the way.'
 
 'Rights have you, and may well be bold;
 
 You with my Father have grown old
 
 In friendship--strive--for his sake go--
 
 Turn from us all the coming woe:
 
 This would I beg; but on my mind
 
 A passive stillness is enjoined.
 
 On you, if room for mortal aid
 
 Be left, is no restriction laid;
 
 You not forbidden to recline
 
 With hope upon the Will divine.'
 
 'Hope,' said the old Man, 'must abide
 
 With all of us, whate'er betide.
 
 In Craven's Wilds is many a den,
 
 To shelter persecuted men:
 
 Far under ground is many a cave,
 
 Where they might lie as in the grave,
 
 Until this storm hath ceased to rave:
 
 Or let them cross the River Tweed,
 
 And be at once from peril freed!'
 
 'Ah tempt me not!' she faintly sighed;
 
 'I will not counsel nor exhort,
 
 With my condition satisfied;
 
 But you, at least, may make report
 
 Of what befalls;--be this your task--
 
 This may be done;--'tis all I ask!'
 
 She spake--and from the Lady's sight
 
 The Sire, unconscious of his age,
 
 Departed promptly as a Page
 
 Bound on some errand of delight.
 
 --The noble Francis--wise as brave,
 
 Thought he, may want not skill to save.
 
 With hopes in tenderness concealed,
 
 Unarmed he followed to the field;
 
 Him will I seek: the insurgent Powers
 
 Are now besieging Barnard's Towers,--
 
 'Grant that the Moon which shines this night
 
 May guide them in a prudent flight!'
 
 But quick the turns of chance and change,
 
 And knowledge has a narrow range;
 
 Whence idle fears, and needless pain,
 
 And wishes blind, and efforts vain.--
 
 The Moon may shine, but cannot be
 
 Their guide in flight--already she
 
 Hath witnessed their captivity.
 
 She saw the desperate assault
 
 Upon that hostile castle made;--
 
 But dark and dismal is the vault
 
 Where Norton and his sons are laid!
 
 Disastrous issue!--he had said
 
 'This night yon faithless Towers must yield,
 
 Or we for ever quit the field.
 
 --Neville is utterly dismayed,
 
 For promise fails of Howard's aid;
 
 And Dacre to our call replies
 
 That 'he' is unprepared to rise.
 
 My heart is sick;--this weary pause
 
 Must needs be fatal to our cause.
 
 The breach is open--on the wall,
 
 This night, the Banner shall be planted!'
 
 --'Twas done: his Sons were with him--all;
 
 They belt him round with hearts undaunted
 
 And others follow;--Sire and Son
 
 Leap down into the court;--''Tis won'--
 
 They shout aloud--but Heaven decreed
 
 That with their joyful shout should close
 
 The triumph of a desperate deed
 
 Which struck with terror friends and foes!
 
 The friend shrinks back--the foe recoils
 
 From Norton and his filial band;
 
 But they, now caught within the toils,
 
 Against a thousand cannot stand;--
 
 The foe from numbers courage drew,
 
 And overpowered that gallant few.
 
 'A rescue for the Standard!' cried
 
 The Father from within the walls;
 
 But, see, the sacred Standard falls!--
 
 Confusion through the Camp spread wide:
 
 Some fled; and some their fears detained:
 
 But ere the Moon had sunk to rest
 
 In her pale chambers of the west,
 
 Of that rash levy nought remained.
 

